Blog post: state of deployments to K8s in Octopus (#1183)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2024-12/the-state-of-deployments-to-kubernetes-in-octopus/index.md

---
title: The state of deployments to Kubernetes in Octopus
description: An overview of the evolution of Octopus's capabilities for deployments to Kubernetes and a sneak peek into the future
author: nikita.dergilev@octopus.com
visibility: private
published: 3020-01-01-1400
metaImage: 
bannerImage: 
bannerImageAlt: 125 characters max, describes image to people unable to see it.
isFeatured: false
tags: 
  - DevOps
  - Company
  - Product
  - Kubernetes
---

> For the past few years, Kubernetes has been Octopus's main focus, and we plan to continue prioritizing it in 2025. We want to deliver the best experience for enterprises automating deployments to Kubernetes, especially at the scale of hundreds of microservices and many teams.

Author: I thought about it :-) I'm not sure if non-K8s customers will read it, so that's why I used this phrase. I think it's okay to say 'one of'. @TeganAli , what do you think?

> For the past few years, Kubernetes has been Octopus's main focus, and we plan to continue prioritizing it in 2025. We want to deliver the best experience for enterprises automating deployments to Kubernetes, especially at the scale of hundreds of microservices and many teams.

Reviewer: I like the idea of making it clear it's one of our focuses. How about:
For the past few years, Kubernetes has been one of our focuses at Octopus, and we'll continue strengthening our support for Kubernetes in 2025.

The challenge for modern DevOps and Platform teams is to find the right set of tools to automate deployments. On the one hand, these tools should be capable of managing deployments at scale. On the other hand, they should be easy to adopt at the very beginning when you’re starting with just a couple of applications and a few teams on Kubernetes. You really need to plan for the future and consider questions like:

- Where will you deploy (the number of environments, regions, clusters)?
- Who will own deployments (and how easy will it be to self-serve)?
- How many applications will be deployed?
- What extra requirements does your organization have?

If you want to learn more, I recorded [a webinar about deployments to Kubernetes at scale](https://youtu.be/uXUG8s4sFMY?si=PTGchl4U1uTctHYO).

## CD problems and tools evolution

GitOps has been the main topic in Kubernetes deployments for a few years now. Argo CD is the leading OSS project in this space. Flux CD, the second mature project, is still popular, but it has noticeably lower adoption. Other projects like Jenkins X or Fleet are niche products.

> This year, the focus shifted from the GitOps implementation in general to a more narrow problem of environment promotions with GitOps.

Reviewer 2: The rest of this section talked about the environment promotion, but it might be a good opportunity to give a little head nod to the fact that Octopus has known and solved this problem for many years. It might be a new problem to GitOps practitioners but its a solved problem for Octopus. We have just taken the previous sucessful model and applied it to K8S deployment patterns.

The earlier we can make these sorts of comments the more readers might get that Octopus does this well before they stop reading. I can see from the scrollbar that there is plenty more time to go into detail, but dont let the headline of Octopus' success get lost.

Author: I like it!

@TeganAli , I'm not sure what would work better. Do you want me to add it in Git or in the doc?

Author: I realised that there is already a sentence on it at the very beginning of the next section.

@TeganAli , do you see a way to expand on it without breaking the structure?

Reviewer: I'll have a think about this when I review again

We believe organizations should use one tool and set of practices for all their deployments, instead of starting from scratch and building a completely new stack for each hosting platform.
We simultaneously adopt Kubernetes-native tools, like Helm and Kustomize, along with best practices like declarative configurations and using Git as the source of truth. Our goal is to integrate these tools and practices into Octopus, making it easier to incorporate them into deployment pipelines.

Kubernetes introduced a few new challenges. One of the biggest challenges is that a deployment doesn't finish when you apply a configuration to a cluster. Instead, the cluster should achieve the desired state, eventually. At the same time, knowing the deployment status is vital. That’s why our focus right now is to bring more capabilities to verify deployments to Kubernetes in Octopus. See the sections below to learn more.

Currently, over 400 organizations use Octopus for regular deployments to Kubernetes. More than 300 of these deploy every week, and over 250 deploy daily.

These organizations manage more than 8,000 projects and run approximately 600,000 Kubernetes steps each month.

> 24% of these projects get deployed with our built-in Helm step and 18% with the plain YAML step. For 18% of the projects, our customers decided not to manage manifests outside of Octopus and configured them instead with our **Configure and apply Kubernetes resources** step.

Reviewer 2: A user might ask, what is a "Configure and apply Kubernetes resources" step? Do you want to signal that it is a UI\Forms-based configuration step. I.e. we support all levels of expertise.

## New Kubernetes features in Octopus during 2023 and 2024

> Let’s revisit 2023 and 2024 to see how the experience with Kubernetes has changed in Octopus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s revisit 2023 and 2024 to see some of the ways the experience with Kubernetes has changed in Octopus.
```

__[Kubernetes Object Status](https://roadmap.octopus.com/c/73-kubernetes-object-status-check)__

With the release of 2023.2, Kubernetes Object Status became one of the most popular features in Octopus. Now, deployments in Octopus no longer end with a simple manifest application. Instead, Octopus can interpret YAML manifests and monitor the status of objects until the cluster achieves the desired state.

With this feature, the success or failure of a deployment in Octopus also reflects if the desired configuration has successfully started on the target. Octopus also provides a list of deployed objects along with basic information and health status at the time of deployment. This removes the need to check other tools for deployment verification.

__[Kubernetes Object Status for Helm](https://roadmap.octopus.com/c/171-kubernetes-object-status-for-helm)__

> Recently, we enhanced the Kubernetes Object Status by adding support for Helm. Since Helm already includes built-in capabilities to verify deployment success (using the `--wait` argument), we didn’t want to replace this functionality. Instead, we improved its discoverability and enabled it by default for the newly added steps. Octopus can also display the object list, health, and details for Helm in the same way it does for all Kubernetes steps.

Reviewer 2: >... we didn’t want to replace this functionality

why?
Something like...

>... we didn't want to reinvent the wheel or change the way users utilized their existing tools, we simply wanted to enhance how those tools work during a deployment. 

It might be a good opportunity to subtly point out that we aren't trying to force teams to throw out what they know about K8S deployments. We are taking their knowledge and making it more successful in a powerful system.

__[Git triggers](https://roadmap.octopus.com/c/68-git-triggers-for-release-creation)__

We recently released another trigger. Now, Octopus can monitor Git repositories for changes and create releases automatically upon updates. This enables advanced scenarios, like simultaneous updates for multiple projects if a configuration template is modified, or creating a release when Helm values files change.

__[Kubernetes agent](https://roadmap.octopus.com/c/84-octopus-agent-for-kubernetes)__

2024.2 was a big release for Kubernetes in Octopus. Along with the new triggers, we launched the Kubernetes agent. This is our largest enhancement to the Kubernetes experience in Octopus to date (but this won't be the case for long). The agent allows for workerless deployments to Kubernetes, greatly enhances cluster authentication, improves security, and simplifies network configuration. We recommend using the agent as the default method for connecting Octopus with Kubernetes clusters.

__[Kubernetes worker](https://roadmap.octopus.com/c/108-kubernetes-worker-new-autoscaling-worker-on-kubernetes)__

> The Kubernetes agent allows for efficient use of cluster resources by scaling up and down based on deployment load changes. We received extensive feedback requesting the same flexibility for all deployments. As a response, we released a new Kubernetes worker. This scalable worker operates on Kubernetes and can deploy to any target or execute any runbook. Additionally, it provides a solution for customers who cannot install Kubernetes agents on their clusters, such as those with small edge clusters where every megabit of RAM is critical.

Reviewer 2: > The Kubernetes agent allows for efficient use of cluster resources by scaling up and down based on deployment load changes.

I obviously get that what is actually happening is that we are running the tasks across the cluster, but I read this as saying the agent itself scales up and down. which it doesn't. Not sure if you think its worth being a little more accurate here or not.

To automate this process, we can create an external feed trigger for each microservice project, pointing to its corresponding container image. Additionally, we can establish an orchestration project that manages releases and initiates deployments for all or selected microservice projects. This orchestration project can include a trigger that points to the Helm chart.

You can see how it works in practice in our [Samples instance](https://samples.octopus.app/app#/Spaces-105/projects?page=1&pageSize=50). The orchestration project is the first project in each project group (Helm/Azure, Kustomize/AWS, or YAML/GCP). All other projects within the group consist of individual microservices. You can find the configuration for container image triggers in the `Project` > `Triggers` section.

### Adding new targets

Finally, what if our 500 microservices run across multiple clusters? For instance, we might have a dedicated cluster for each customer or branch. In this scenario, we can expect to frequently provision new clusters and want each new cluster to have the latest versions of the microservices immediately upon creation.

> To streamline this process, the first step is to add a Kubernetes agent during the cluster provisioning. Once the agent is installed, it will automatically register the cluster with Octopus.

Reviewer 2: Worth throwing in another SEO keyword here?

>To streamline this process, the first step is to add a Kubernetes agent during the cluster provisioning. Using the Octopus **Terraform Provider** we can ensure that our infrastructure teams can automatically configure and install the agent as the clusters are registered and managed with Octopus.

> You can also configure deployment target triggers to initiate deployments to a target as soon as it becomes available. This eliminates the need for manual intervention after adding a new cluster. With Octopus, it’s possible to install all necessary system applications (cluster bootstrapping) as well as any software you want to run on the cluster.

Reviewer 2: I like this little scenario.
Maybe drive the point home with something like.

> With Octopus, it’s possible to install all necessary system applications as well as any software you want to run on the cluster as soon as it comes online. Cluster bootstrapping is as simple as adding it to Octopus and all the relevant services and applications are calculated and applied based on the expected deployment state to the rest of your systems.
